Add Blog Post for EFCore refactor (#1263)
jellyfin/jellyfin.org: blog/2025/01-01-efcore-and-me/index.mdx

---
title: EFCore refactoring is here
description: EFCore, Jellyfin and me.
authors: JPVenson
slug: efcore-refactoring
tags: [unstable, warning, efcore]
---

EFCore is here and this will have consequences.

> We finally reached our first milestone in cleaning up the legacy code we inherited from emby regarding the database access, that means all sql builders that were targeting SqLite directly are now removed from code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We finally reached our first milestone in cleaning up the legacy code regarding the database access, that means all sql builders that were targeting SqLite directly are now removed from code.
```

This marks the first step towards a completely new Database design. But we now need to take a quick look ahead and see whats next.

Please continue to read further to see what exactly that means and what the future brings.

> \- JP

Reviewer 2: maybe use Venson since people are more familiar with that name? or JPVenson to be consistent with the bottom section

{/* truncate */}

## What exactly have we done

> Josh already made a blog post in November 2024 explaining a lot of what we were planning to achive and i now want to take the feedback and questions we have gotten and clarify a few points.

Reviewer 2: should link to the blog post

> Josh already made a blog post in November 2024 explaining a lot of what we were planning to achive and i now want to take the feedback and questions we have gotten and clarify a few points.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Josh already made a blog post in November 2024 explaining a lot of what we were planning to achieve, and I now want to take the feedback and questions we have gotten and clarify a few points.
```

Although this sentence can be reworded for better clarity:
```
Josh’s blog post in November 2024 outlined much of what we aimed to achieve, and I want to take this opportunity to address the feedback and questions we've received, clarifying a few key points.
```

> The old Emby code contained a lot of code that were directly accessing the underlying used database using SqLite. SqLite is a file based database where jellyfin is storying most of its important data. This has been an issue for 3 reasons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The old Emby code contained a lot of instances where the underlying database (SQLite) was directly accessed using hand written SQL queries. SQLite is a file based database where jellyfin is storying most of its important data. This has been an issue for 3 reasons.
```

> The old Emby code contained a lot of code that were directly accessing the underlying used database using SqLite. SqLite is a file based database where jellyfin is storying most of its important data. This has been an issue for 3 reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The old code contained a lot of code that were directly accessing the underlying used database using SqLite. SqLite is a file based database where jellyfin is storying most of its important data. This has been an issue for 3 reasons.
```

> The old Emby code contained a lot of code that were directly accessing the underlying used database using SqLite. SqLite is a file based database where jellyfin is storying most of its important data. This has been an issue for 3 reasons.

Reviewer 3: storing*

> The old Emby code contained a lot of code that were directly accessing the underlying used database using SqLite. SqLite is a file based database where jellyfin is storying most of its important data. This has been an issue for 3 reasons.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The old Emby code contained a lot of code that were directly accessing the underlying used database using SqLite. SqLite is a file based database where Jellyfin is storying most of its important data. This has been an issue for 3 reasons.
```

> 1. The old code was very poorly written in terms of extensibility

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The old code was very poorly written
```
I thought it was poorly written in general

Author: no just the old code

Reviewer 2: No i mean it was poorly written in general, not just in terms of extensibility

> 2. The old code was extreamly complex

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The old code was extremely complex
```
typo

> 3. It was explicitly written to support SqLite only

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. It was explicitly written to support SQLite only and nothing else
```

> We were not able to quickly extend our database and do it in a way that was reliable. The new code uses EntityFramework migrations which is the industry standard for this sort of database migrations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because of this, we were not able to quickly extend our database it in a reliable way. The new code uses EntityFramework migrations which is the industry standard for database migrations on the .NET Framework.
```

## What haven't we done

While we are currently working on it, the current PR does __not__ add support for alternative database providers on its own. 

> This is a huge change in of itself and when we add it, it will likely be a highly experimental change that we will keep that way for quite some time.

Reviewer 3: For better clarity:
```suggestion
"This is a significant change in itself, and when introduced, it will likely remain highly experimental for quite some time.
```

Reviewer 2: @Fallenbagel did you type an extra " at the beginning of the line

Reviewer 3: @felix920506 accidental, as previously i had it in quotes before changing it to suggestion. Just removed it

> Very importantly, we also have not yet optimised the rest of jellyfin to work with the new database access. That means it is quite possible that unstable builds might be significatly slower while we are rewriting the rest of the code to utilise the new structures.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Very importantly, we also have not yet optimised the rest of jellyfin to work with the new database access. That means it is quite possible that unstable builds might be significantly slower while we are rewriting the rest of the code to utilise the new structures.
```

> Very importantly, we also have not yet optimised the rest of jellyfin to work with the new database access. That means it is quite possible that unstable builds might be significatly slower while we are rewriting the rest of the code to utilise the new structures.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Very importantly, we also have not yet optimised the rest of Jellyfin to work with the new database access. That means it is quite possible that unstable builds might be significatly slower while we are rewriting the rest of the code to utilise the new structures.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: add database backup feature to this list?

## The Future

> We will soon reenable unstable builds so you can test out the EFCore migration. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will soon re-enable unstable builds so you can test out the EFCore migration. 
```

> The migration will aggregate the old `library.db` into the `jellyfin.db` file and then rename it to `library.db.old` so the unstable builds will no longer be compatiable with previous versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The migration will aggregate the old `library.db` into the `jellyfin.db` file and then rename it to `library.db.old`, so the unstable builds will no longer be compatible with the previous versions.
```

> To migrate, we explicitly __do not support older version then 10.10.3__. That means if you want to test the migrations, you have to do so from an up-to-date database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To migrate, we explicitly __do NOT support older version than 10.10.3__. That means if you want to test the migrations, you have to do so from an up-to-date database.
```
There should be a check to make sure the database was from 10.10.3 or above and refuse to start otherwise

Author: Its in PR already.

> To migrate, we explicitly __do not support older version then 10.10.3__. That means if you want to test the migrations, you have to do so from an up-to-date database.

Reviewer 3: For better clarity:
```suggestion
To migrate, we explicitly __do not support versions older than 10.10.3__. This means that if you want to test the migrations, you must start with an up-to-date database.
```

> Thank you and if you have questions dont hesitate to join our matrix channel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thank you, and if you have questions, don't hesitate to join our matrix channel.
```

---
title: EFCore refactoring is here
description: EFCore, Jellyfin and me.
authors: JPVenson
slug: efcore-refactoring
tags: [unstable, warning, efcore]
---

EFCore is here and this will have consequences.

> We finally reached our first milestone in cleaning up the legacy code regarding the database access, that means all sql builders that were targeting SqLite directly are now removed from code.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We finally reached our first milestone in cleaning up the legacy code regarding the database access, that means all SQL builders that were targeting SQLite directly are now removed from code.  
```

> We finally reached our first milestone in cleaning up the legacy code regarding the database access, that means all SQL builders that were targeting SQLite directly are now removed from code.  

Reviewer 5: I'd start with "We have finally..." but otherwise I agree though spaces around the em-dash please.

This marks the first step towards a completely new database design. But we now need to take a quick look ahead and see what's next.

> Please continue to read further to see what exactly that means and what the future brings.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Please continue reading further to see what exactly that means and what the future brings.
```

\- JPVenson

{/* truncate */}

## What exactly have we done

> [Josh’s blog post](../../2024/11-03-efcore-refactoring-incoming/index.mdx) in November 2024 outlined much of what we aimed to achieve, and I want to take this opportunity to address the feedback and questions we've received, clarifying a few key points.  

Reviewer 5: "Joshua" please.

> The old Emby code contained a lot of code that were directly accessing the underlying used database using SqLite. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The old code contained a lot of code that was directly accessing the underlying SQLite database. 
```

> SqLite is a file based database where jellyfin is storing most of its important data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SQLite is a file based database where Jellyfin is storing most of its important data.
```

This has been an issue for 3 reasons.
1. The old code was very poorly written
2. The old code was very complex
3. It was explicitly written to support SQLite only and nothing else  

> Because of this, we were unable to quickly and reliably extend our database. The new code uses EntityFramework migrations, which is the industry standard for database migrations.  

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Because of this, we were unable to quickly and reliably extend our database. The new code uses EntityFramework migrations, which is the industry standard for databasemigrations in the C# ecosystem.  
```

> Because of this, we were not able to quickly extend our database it in a reliable way. The new code uses EntityFramework migrations which is the industry standard for database migrations.  

Reviewer 3: Better clarity and removed a redundant it:
```suggestion
Because of this, we were unable to quickly and reliably extend our database. The new code uses EntityFramework migrations, which is the industry standard for database migrations.  
```

## What haven't we done

While we are currently working on it, the current PR does __not__ add support for alternative database providers on its own. 

> Other database provider will be a significant change in itself, and when introduced, it will likely remain highly experimental for quite some time.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other database providers will be a significant change in itself, and when introduced, it will likely remain highly experimental for quite some time.  
```

> Very importantly, we also have not yet optimised the rest of Jellyfin to work with the new database access. That means it is quite possible that unstable builds might be significatly slower while we are rewriting the rest of the code to utilise the new structures.  

Reviewer 7: *significantly

> There are also already plans that build upon the new architecture to provide proper means to back up a Jellyfin instance now that everything is strongly typed. This means a plugin can now back up the entire Jellyfin instance while it is running, something that was previously not possible to do reliably.

Reviewer 5: >to provide _a_ proper means to

> There are also already plans that build upon the new architecture to provide proper means to backup a Jellyfin instance now everything is strongly typed. This could mean a plugin that can backup the whole Jellyfin instance, while it is running which is currently not possible to do reliably.

Reviewer 3: Better clarity and some syntax issue fixes:
```suggestion
There are also already plans that build upon the new architecture to provide proper means to back up a Jellyfin instance now that everything is strongly typed. This means a plugin can now back up the entire Jellyfin instance while it is running, something that was previously not possible to do reliably.
```

> There are also already plans that build upon the new architecture to provide proper means to backup a jellyfin instance now everything is strongly typed. This could mean a plugin that can backup the whole jellyfin instance, while it is running which is currently not possible to do reliably.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are also already plans that build upon the new architecture to provide proper means to backup a Jellyfin instance now everything is strongly typed. This could mean a plugin that can backup the whole Jellyfin instance, while it is running which is currently not possible to do reliably.
```

> Further would this export/import plugin be needed if we want to support multiple database providers to export data to other databases.

Reviewer 3: Fixed a big syntax issue with the wording and increased clarity:
```suggestion
Furthermore, this export/import plugin would be necessary if we aim to support multiple database providers and allow exporting data to other databases.
```

> Furthermore, this export/import plugin would be necessary if we aim to support multiple database providers and allow exporting data to other databases.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Furthermore, this export/import plugin would be necessary if we aim to support multiple database providers and allow exporting data to other databases systems.
```

Reviewer 5: Drop the "s" after databases - database systems - but yes.

> Further would this export/import plugin be needed if we really want to support multiple database providers to export data to other databases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further would this export/import plugin be needed if we want to support multiple database providers to export data to other databases.
```

## The Future

> We will soon re-enable unstable builds so you can test out the EFCore migration. 

Reviewer 5: They've actually been on for quite a while now (got accidentally enabled after 10.10.3 and I never turned them off), but it should be fine.

Reviewer 5: Actually as discussed let's pause this week's unstable so the blog post has a week and a bit in the wild before we do another unstable, just in case.

The migration will aggregate the old `library.db` into the `jellyfin.db` file and then rename it to `library.db.old`, so the unstable builds will no longer be compatible with the previous versions.  

To migrate, we explicitly __do not support versions older than 10.10.3__. This means that if you want to test the migrations, you must start with an up-to-date database.

> Thank you, and if you have questions, don't hesitate to join our matrix channel.  

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Thank you, and if you have questions, don't hesitate to join our matrix channels.  
```
